(jazzy music)
This video's going to teach you
a sort of an introduction to variables.
Variables are a building block of JavaScript
and you can't use JavaScript without knowing variables
so we're gonna get a primer on what they are
and what the different types of them
and what declaration means
as well as what a statement is in JavaScript.
So, if some of the topics in this video
seem a little bit deep-endy for you, don't sweat it.
We're gonna be using these in absolutely every example
from here on out, and I will come back to these concepts
and make sure that I solidify them.
So, go into your Playground folder
and make a new file called Variables.
And I'm gonna call that variables.html,
I'm going to use my HTML base snippet here,
and I'm just going to give myself
a script tag in there, good.
And just to make sure that everything is working,
I'm going to console.log, "hey" and put a semi-colon on.
I will talk about that semi-colon in just a second.
If I open this up in my browser,
and look at my console, we see "hey" there, good.
So there's three different ways to make a variable
or the word we use in JavaScript is called
declaring a variable, and they are var, let, and const.
So let's start with the first one which is var.
So to make a variable you say "var"
and then you make a name of the variable
and you can use almost anything for a variable name.
I'll talk about some of the restrictions in just a second.
So I'll say "first" is equal to "wes"
and what I've done there is I've just created a new variable
called "first" and I've set it to a
what's called a string, and I'll talk
about that in a second, of "wes".
Now if I were to refresh this page here,
and then type in "first"
you'll see that we actually get the value
that is inside of that variable.
I can also do it by doing a console.log
and "first",
and you see that we see the value "wes".
The second way to declare a variable is with "let"
so, we'll say "let age" is equal to "300".
Put a semi-colon on the end, there.
And again, if I were to go over to refresh this page
and type in "age", you see that we get 300
as stored inside of the variable that we have, there.
And then the third way is with "const".
So we say "const cool" is equal to "true"
and that is what's called a constant variable.
Now, the naming of these things isn't great
because "const" means constant,
and we'll talk about what that means in just a second.
But it's still called a variable.
This is a variable, this is a variable,
this is a variable.
I've had people get angry with me before
bein' like, "Oh, this is only a variable,
"and this is a constant," and then they don't know
what to call this, but all three of these
are different types of variables.
There's different ways to declare the variables
and we'll talk about what the pros and cons
to all of them are in just a second.
But before we get into that,
I wanna talk about these little semi-colons
that we have right here.
These little semi-colons that I put at all of my lines
that we have here,
they're used to terminate the line of JavaScript.
And this is what is referred to
as a statement in JavaScript.
Now, a statement is an instruction to the computer,
to the browser, to the JavaScript interpreter
to do something.
This can usually be summed up as,
"a variable was being declared,
"a variable was being updated,
"a function was being called."
Like in this case, I have console.log
and that's actually something called a method
that we're gonna be learning about.
So, anytime you wanna do something in JavaScript,
that is referred to as a statement
and when you're done your statement,
you put a semi-colon at the end of the line.
So we take a look, here.
This is called a variable declaration, statement,
and this is a function call statement,
et cetera, et cetera.
One thing that we will sort of run into
in JavaScript is these things called code blocks.
So if I have what's called an IF statement,
again I know I keep saiying this,
we're gonna go into it, don't sweat it,
"age" is greater than "10",
then we're gonna say
"console.log", "You are old"
And if we're to refresh this and say "You are old."
So, the question here is
how come I didn't put a semi-colon here,
and a semi-colon here, or how come I didn't,
like, obviously I'm done my IF statement,
why did I not put that there?
That is referred to as a code block,
and code blocks are things
that are bound by these curly brackets, here.
We'll talk a lot more about blocks
in some future videos,
and things like function definitions,
IF statements, loops,
they do not need a semi-colon at the end
because you're not actually telling the computer
to do something,
you're just running some code
and you tell the computer to do something inside of it.
So, I will sort of come back and mention
why we do and do not use a semi-colon
and you'll sort of get the hang of it.
It is possible to get away without writing semi-colons
in JavaScript because there's something
in JavaScript that's called ASI
which is automatic semi-colon insertion.
We are not going to be covering that
because it's a much more advanced topic.
Developers who do not use semi-colons
sort of know how ASIs working
and they take advantage of that
and that's totally fine.
It's just a bit of a topic
that people are on either side of it
and it's best to learn JavaScript with semi-colons,
and then once you hit a point
where you can decide whether your style
doesn't use it or does use it,
you can make that decision on your own.
I personally, as a professional developer,
use them myself.
So, nothin' to sweat about, there.
All right, back to it.
Let's talk about some variables.
I'll get rid of this IF statement, right here.
Let's talk about what the difference
between all three of these different types of variables are.
Let's get rid of this console.log.
I'll get rid of this comment, here.
So, "var" and "let" can be updated.
So if you every wanna change what the value is
of one of these variables,
you can simply just change it.
So if I were to say "first" is equal to "westerhoff"
and I were to go back here and type in "first",
there we go,
you'd see that it has been updated.
Same with "age".
If I were to say "age" is equal to "400", I can,
so I can either run these from my script, here
or I can run them from my console, here.
And because these are what I refer to as global variables,
we'll talk about scope in a future video,
I can update them either from the script tag, here
or right from my console.
And you see that what I've done here is
I've updated my "first" variable,
I've also updated the "age" value by just setting it again.
You'll notice that I do not have to re-declare the variable
so I did not say something like this,
"var first" is equal to "wes"
and then I did "var first" is equal to "westerhoff",
that's actually a bad practice
and in most cases, in modules specifically,
it won't even work.
So you only ever need to declare the variable
with a "var", "let", or "const" once,
and then whenever you wanna update it,
you don't need to put that in front of it,
You can simply just go ahead and set it to its new value.
You cannot set a "const" variable to be something else.
So if I were to go say "cool" is equal to "false"
which would never happen,
you're gonna see that we get this thing
that's called an error in JavaScript.
And errors in JavaScript will tell you sort of
what went wrong, and also where it went wrong.
So here, it says, "Uncaught TypeError
"Assignment to constant variable" on line 18.
Well, that's exactly what we did.
We tried to change a variable that was set to a constant.
Now, constant variables cannot be changed,
so think of a API key or anything that you don't ever want
to be changed, you set them to a constant
and the value that is put into that variable
won't be able to be changed.
Now, we will, that is not totally true.
We will followup when we hit arrays and objects,
meaning that there's a difference between the array
or object that it's bound to
and the values that live inside of it.
But we won't get into it just yet.
Just right now, what we need to know
is that "const" variables cannot be changed,
"var" and "let" variables can be changed or can be updated.
Next thing we need to know about variables
is this thing called Strict Mode.
So if I were to
let's just comment this out,
on your editor you can use Command or Control
and forward slash, and that will comment out
your JavaScript code,
and that will actually just make the browser
skip over that code.
We still have it there, but it's just not gonna be read
by the browser when we run it.
So, if I were to go here, and say
"dog" is equal to "snickers"
and refresh this and type in "dog",
you see that we just made a variable, here.
But I didn't var letter "const" it,
so what's goin' on?
What happened right there?
Now, if we go ahead and go to the top
of our opening script, here
and in single quotes just type
"use strict" and put a semi-colon on the end there,
now if I refresh the page,
you see we get an error "dog is not defined".
So, in the early days of JavaScript
when it was first invented,
it was possible to do this type of thing
where you could actually create a variable
without first declaring it
and the browser would go like,
"Oops, you forgot to actually, like, var it,
"so I'll just do it for you."
And obviously that can lead to a lot of bugs
down the road and it's bad coding.
It's pretty sloppy, so it's just not what you want to do.
So what happened is that
they obviously have to keep this functionality
'cause some guy fifteen years ago
wrote some terrible code where he didn't "var" his variables
and that still has to work today,
so they can't go and break JavaScript.
That's what's referred to as backwards compatibility,
but they can introduce new modes into the browser
and it's kinda like hard-mode in your video game,
but this is just strict mode in your JavaScript
where if you try to do something stupid like this
where you create a variable without declaring
a "var", "let", or "const" first,
it's gonna yell at you and say like,
"dog is not...," like "what are you doing
"trying to update a variable
"you have not yet created it."
So to fix that, you would either just say, like,
"var dog" is equal to "hugo"
and what that will do is
it will first make the variable
and then go ahead and update it, good,
or of course, you can just stick a var
right in front of it
and get rid of that, entirely
and that will work, as well.
Another thing you can do is you can just say,
"var dog" and then update it on the next line,
and this will work
because what happens here, it that
if I were to do this,
if we see, like, what did I do?
I declared a variable but I didn't set it to anything.
And if you type it in here,
you'll see that it's set to something called Undefined,
which is one of the types we're gonna learn about
in just a second.
So strict mode is pretty cool.
You won't have to be typing that every single time
'cause A, we're gonna just be doing these good practices,
and second, this is enforced by default
when you use JavaScript modules,
and JavaScript modules are probably how you'll be writing
all of your modern JavaScript.
So, it doesn't hurt to pop it in.
There's no real down side, other than you writing good code,
which is not a down side.
Other than that, you can
pop it at top of any of your script JS files
or in your script tags.
Now, let's move on to the second difference
between "var", "let", and "const".
Let's get rid of dog,
let's get rid of these,
and let's go back to our original three variables
that we have, here.
And the second is scoping.
Now, scoping in JavaScript answers the question
like, "Where are my variables available to me?"
And we're going to have an entire section of this course
based on scoping 'cause it's such a fundamental concept
of JavaScript, but for now, we need to know
that "var" variables are scoped differently
than "let" and "const" variables.
So, "var" variables are what I refer to as
function scoped variables,
and "let" and "const" variables are referred to
what is called block scope variables.
So, what does this mean?
We're gonna learn what blocks and functions are
in the future.
So because we don't know what either of those are yet,
we're gonna put that on ice.
Just know that "var" variables are function, scoped
and they're only available inside of the parent function
and these are block scoped,
and blocks are gonna be these little curly brackets.
I've told you too much.
I've told you what a block is.
We'll continue on
in the function and block videos about this.
So, the question is, "What should I use?"
What are we going to be using in this entire course?
They're all valid, they're all part of the JavaScript,
"let" and "const" were introduced
as part of what is called ES-6
which is only a couple years old,
and "var" has been in the language
for as long as it's been invented.
How old is JavaScript?
1995, so "var" variables have been around
for a long, long time.
So, you may sometimes see some people on the internet,
you know there's people on the internet
saying "var" variables are old,
they're deprecated.
They're not.
It's just that most developers
or some developers, I myself,
prefer to use "let" and "const"
because the block scoping that we're gonna learn about
makes a little bit more sense,
as well as the benefit of assigning a constant value
to these variables
and not accidentally overwriting a variable,
which can lead to bugs.
So, what do I do?
So, these are my rules and these are only my opinions,
these are not facts.
So you very well may have your own opinions
and I welcome you to have those.
The first is I use "consts" by default.
So any time I create a variable,
I just default it to "const" because I don't know
if I'll need to be updating that or not.
Then, if I need to change a value of a variable
I will just use a "let".
So sometimes I'll make a variable here,
called "cool" and then I'll realize, you know what,
I might not be cool,
so I need to change that to a "let"
so that I can set it to "false" in the future.
So no sweat there,
you just go back and change it to a "let" value
and then I almost never use a "var" variable.
There is a couple of edu-cacey things
where if you're declaring a variable inside of a block
it's kind of annoying sometimes
when it's block scoped.
Again, we'll cover that as we go along.
So, "const" by default,
"let" when I need it.
I don't really use "var" all that much.
I know a lot of developers go by that,
but again, that's not gospel.
That's just my opinion.
Uh, last thing we need to talk about, here
is naming conventions.
What can you call your variables?
As a convention, variables should not start with a capital.
So if I were to go here,
and make a dog variable
as a "const Dog" is equal to "bowser".
Is that a dog or is it that
the green guy from that video game?
And I'd go out in here.
It works, right?
And you can use capitals all you want
in declaring variables.
It's not wrong, it's not broken JavaScript,
but as a convention,
variables should not start with a capital
unless they are a Class.
We're gonna hit that
when we get into Classes and Prototypes,
and things like that.
So as a general rule, variables should not have a capital
at the start.
Variables must start with either an A to Z letter.
So, a-b-c-d, all the way through z,
or zed, if you're Canadian.
And they can also start with an underscore,
or contain underscore, or dollar signs.
So, I could make a variable called "const"
is equal to "100",
and if I were to refresh this and look for that variable,
you'd see that's there.
That's a valid variable.
Same thing with well, you could do something like this,
and we can go and access it.
Oh, I can't even type.
There we go.
You see that that's actually a valid variable,
so dollar sign and underscore
are two of the only kind of other than A through Z
characters that can be used inside of variables.
The underscore is sort of synonymous
with a helper library called Lowdash,
and the dollar sign is sorta synonymous
with a library called JQuery,
so you generally don't make your own variables
called just dollar sign or just underscore
'cause they've sort of been taken
as a sort of convention,
but you can certainly include them
inside of your variable names, if you want.
If a variable is made up of two words,
so if I wanted to make a variable called
I love to eat pizza, or I love pizza,
you could do something like this,
"const iLovePizza",
this is what is referred to as camel-case.
So, camel-case is every word inside of your variable
will contain an upper-case, except for the first one
because of the reasons we just talked about.
Upper camel-case is where you do start it with a capital,
however, that's almost never used
in JavaScript unless you are defining a Class,
so, maybe we should write some here,
so camel-case is equal to "true"
and we'll make another one called upper camel-case,
put a capital "U" and we'll say
"const ILoveToEatHotDogs"
is equal to "false".
There is also snake-case.
Oooo, that's kind of fun.
So, "const this_is_snake_case",
so instead of using camel-case, which is capitals,
you use underscores in your variable names
and that's gonna be "cool".
Set that to a string.
And then, there's kebob-case,
and kebob-case is not allowed in JavaScript, so this is...
"const this-is-kebob-case".
See, I can't even type it 'cause I never do it.
Uh, that is not allowed in JavaScript.
Why, because dashes are not allowed in variables
in JavaScript.
I know they are allowed in CSS selector,
so that goofs some people up.
So, those are the ones that are available.
I personally, and I think most developers will always use
the first one which is camel-case,
upper camel-case if you're building a Class.
Some people coming from sort of PHP world
like to use underscores, myself not included.
And kebob-case is not allowed.
Look at that, I broke it.
Just because of putting kebobs in there.
That's it for variables.
That's sort of our primer.
We'll be using them throughout the rest of the course
and I'll see you in the next video.